latexinput: jst-style  
Author:           Wesley A. Hill  
Institution:      Durham University, UK  
AuthorEmail:      w.a.hill@durham.ac.uk  
BookAuthor:       Christian Smith    
BookTitle:        The Bible Made Impossible: Why Biblicism is Not a Truly Evangelical Reading of Scripture  
ShortTitle:       The Bible Made Impossible  
BookPublication:  Grand Rapids, Michigan: Brazos Press, 2011. Pp. xiv + 220. Hardcover. $22.99.  
Keywords:         evangelicalism, Catholicism, hermeneutics  
DateSubmitted:    30 July 2011  
DateAccepted:     25 October 2011  
DatePublished:    26 October 2011  
jstyear:          2011  
jstvol:           1  
jstiss:           1  
firstpage:        501  
baseheaderlevel:  3  
latexinput: jst-review     

Christian Smith, professor of sociology and director of the Center for
the Study of Religion and Society at the University of Notre Dame, best
known perhaps for his award-winning book, co-authored with Michael O.
Emerson, *Divided by Faith: Evangelical Religion and the Problem of Race
in America* (Oxford University Press, 2001), has turned his attention to
evangelical use of Scripture in his most recent study. The title
discloses the two halves of the book’s argument. Evangelical “biblicism”
(to be defined below) has made the Bible “impossible,” has rendered it
unable to achieve the work it was designed to do. But an “evangelical”
reading of the Bible, one that is oriented at all times to the
*evangel*, the Christ-event, avoids the problems of biblicism and allows
Scripture to function rightly in the life of the church.

Smith, a recent convert to Catholicism, writes as a former evangelical
concerned that evangelicals be able to accept his argument on their own
terms, without having recourse to Catholic understandings of Scripture
vis-à-vis the Magisterium. Accordingly, his project targets evangelical
examples of biblicism, by which he refers to “a particular theory about
and style of using the Bible that is defined by a constellation of
related assumptions and beliefs about the Bible’s nature, purpose, and
function” (p. 4). That theory and style is comprised of ten interlocking
features: (1) the Bible is divine writing such that its words are God’s
words; (2) it is a total representation of God’s communication, (3)
including complete coverage of the divine will; (4) it is perspicuous
and thus open to “democratic” interpretation, (5) which proceeds by way
of commonsense hermeneutics, (6) leading to a doctrine of “solo”
*scriptura* (Scripture “denuded,” unclothed by creeds and confessions);
and (7) because the Bible possesses internal harmony (8) and universal
applicability, (9) therefore, an inductive method is best suited to
unearthing the Bible’s meaning, (10) which suggests a handbook model
whereby the Bible is mined for its “positions” on everything from dating
to gardening.

By adopting this biblicist account of the Bible and its function in
Christian thought and life, evangelicals must necessarily also be
committed to the notion that the Bible gives clear and certain purchase
on divine revelation. But, Smith notes, the opposite proves to be true
in practice. While appealing to the same Bible, different evangelical
readers arrive at wildly divergent construals not only of peripheral
matters—such as gender roles in the church or the right mode of
baptism—but also of major, central teachings on christology and
soteriology, to name only two contested arenas. “Knowledge of ‘biblical’
teachings, in short, is characterized by *pervasive interpretive
pluralism*” (p. 17, emphasis original).

For Smith, pervasive interpretive pluralism should force evangelicals to
reconsider what they think about the nature of the Bible itself. “[O]n
important matters the Bible apparently is not clear, consistent, and
univocal enough to enable the best-intentioned, most highly skilled,
believing readers to come to agreement as to what it teaches” (p. 25).
Therefore, rather than being the product of interpreters’
misunderstandings, willful or otherwise, of a clear revelation, the
interpretive pluralism Smith documents exists “because the texts
themselves are multivocal, polysemic, and multivalent in character” (p.
50; cf. p. 142). Seeing the diversity of opinions on almost every major
issue of doctrine and practice should lead evangelicals to recognize the
messy, pluriform character of the Bible.

What is needed, then, is a better theological account of what kind of
text Scripture is and therefore what we can expect from it. Here Smith
enlists Barth’s help (pp. 121-6) to argue that the Bible is a collection
of differing voices that may be heard in concert insofar as they are
heard to be witnesses of God’s singular and saving act in Jesus Christ.
“This means that we always read Scripture Christocentrically,
christologically, and christotelically, as those who *really* believe
what the Nicene and Chalcedonian creeds say” (p. 98, emphasis original).
Adopting this evangelical (in the root sense of *evangel*) rule would
enable evangelicals to eschew the handbook approach, wherein Scripture
is mined for advice on various and sundry concerns, and to concentrate
instead on understanding the Bible as testimony to the saving
significance of Jesus. Addressing the concerns evangelicals (rightly)
wish to address must involve examining those concerns in light of God’s
saving deed in Christ rather than in light of individual texts collected
from the pages of the Bible and treated as timeless truths (p. 111).

Readers may well wonder what is new in this proposal—or for that matter
in the critique that comprises the book’s first half. Part of the
originality of Smith’s argument may be that popular evangelical
instances of biblicism (e.g., the T-shirt slogan “BIBLE—Basic
Instruction Before Leaving Earth” or books with titles like *The World
According to God: A Biblical View of Culture, Work, Science, Sex, and
Everything Else*; see pp. 6-12) are traced back to institutional,
confessional, and scholarly contexts that allegedly give rise to, or at
least do nothing to check, them. So, immediately after noting the
problems of appealing to Bible texts to yield, say, a coherent Christian
account of business ethics, Smith critiques the Westminster Confession
of Faith and the 1978 Chicago Statement on Biblical Inerrancy, among
other statements of belief adopted by institutions like Wheaton College
and Trinity Evangelical Divinity School, as examples of biblicism (p.
14). His point seems to be that these confessions and statements are
organically related to the more popular forms of biblicism he cites.

Smith does acknowledge, on the basis of a survey of required textbooks
at a range of evangelical seminaries and colleges, that biblicism as he
defines it is *not* “taught directly by most faculty and evangelical
seminaries and divinity schools” (p. 185 n. 36). He also qualifies his
argument by acknowledging his definition of biblicism as a synthetic,
summary one, and not all targets of critique would hold to each of its
ten points. But despite the caveats, readers may still find themselves
unsure about how far Smith’s critique is meant to extend. He does not
engage extensively with those who have labored to affirm some aspects of
what he terms “biblicism” in confessionally and historically rooted
ways. The work of Timothy Ward on the sufficiency of Scripture (see his
*Word and Supplement: Speech Acts, Biblical Texts, and the Sufficiency
of Scripture*), for instance, doesn’t appear in Smith’s bibliography,
nor is Kevin Vanhoozer’s recent rehabilitation of an evangelical
“Scripture principle” (in, e.g., *The Drama of Doctrine*) a prominent
conversation partner in the book. One is left wondering whether Smith
deems these proposals for an identity between the (variegated) words of
Scripture and God’s own speech to have failed—and how his argument might
have been complicated or enriched had he chosen to engage them.

At a deeper level, however, it is simply not true that the pervasive
interpretive pluralism Smith takes to be the deadly fruit of a biblicist
model is only a problem for evangelicals and therefore directly related
to evangelical biblicism. The doctrinal differences among evangelicals
that Smith highlights (church polity, free will and predestination, the
“fourth commandment,” atonement and justification, charismatic gifts,
etc.; see pp. 28-36) are debated in Christian churches that would not
identify as Protestant, let alone evangelical. Such disagreement seems
endemic to *Christian* thinking and living, and not just *biblicist*
thinking. By the same token, Smith’s own church, the Roman Catholic
Church, affirms both the divine inspiration and inerrancy of Scripture
(see the *Catechism of the Catholic Church*, Article 3.2.108) and
Scripture’s Christocentric character (Article 3.2.108)—and also adopts
highly specific positions on women’s ordination, clerical celibacy, the
morality of contraceptives, to name only a few issues about which many
evangelicals would disagree. Certainly the Catholic church wishes to
affirm these positions by a train of theological reasoning that
precludes appeal to Scripture alone. However, the point stands that
taking on board a Christocentric hermeneutic does not by itself pressure
the church to abandon a position on issues about which there is,
arguably, diversity, multivocality, and polysemy in the biblical texts.
In that light, can Smith’s constructive proposal achieve all that he
wishes for it to achieve? Apparently not, at least not without entering
into precisely the question that thoughtful evangelicals regularly pose:
How do we know what a “christological,” “evangelical” (i.e.,
gospel-centric) approach to, say, women’s ordination looks like without
engaging in the inherently problematic, complicated task of hearing
Scripture’s *own* voice on that issue from the perspective of the
Christ-event? In other words, it does not seem that asking about
Scripture’s viewpoint(s) on a given issue *x* really is so neatly
separable from asking what it means to think about that issue
christologically, as Smith’s argument implies.

In short, Smith’s book raises questions any serious Christian reader of
the Bible will have to face. Yet due to its vague starting point (how
extensive, exactly, is the tribe of the “biblicists”?) and its equally
vague constructive proposal (how does reading the Bible
“christologically” solve the problem of pervasive interpretive
pluralism, if virtually every thoughtful Christian, including many of
the “biblicists” he critiques, already agrees with that aim?), the book
is unlikely to achieve what is laudable in its goals or to reach those
who most need to give up some of the practices Smith decries.
